Charles Baudelaire, Fleurs du mal (1857)

Flowers of Evil

To the Reader

Folly, error, sin, avarice 
Occupy our minds and labor our bodies, 
And we feed our pleasant remorse 
As beggars nourish their vermin.

Our sins are obstinate, our repentance is faint; 
We exact a high price for our confessions, 
And we gaily return to the miry path, 
Believing that base tears wash away all our stains.

On the pillow of evil Satan, Trismegist, 
Incessantly lulls our enchanted minds, 
And the noble metal of our will 
Is wholly vaporized by this wise alchemist.

The Devil holds the strings which move us! 
In repugnant things we discover charms; 
Every day we descend a step further toward Hell, 
Without horror, through gloom that stinks.

Like a penniless rake who with kisses and bites 
Tortures the breast of an old prostitute, 
We steal as we pass by a clandestine pleasure 
That we squeeze very hard like a dried up orange.

Serried, swarming, like a million maggots, 
A legion of Demons carouses in our brains, 
And when we breathe, Death, that unseen river, 
Descends into our lungs with muffled wails.

If rape, poison, daggers, arson 
Have not yet embroidered with their pleasing designs 
The banal canvas of our pitiable lives, 
It is because our souls have not enough boldness.

But among the jackals, the panthers, the bitch hounds,
The apes, the scorpions, the vultures, the serpents,
The yelping, howling, growling, crawling monsters,
In the filthy menagerie of our vices,

There is one more ugly, more wicked, more filthy! 
Although he makes neither great gestures nor great cries, 
He would willingly make of the earth a shambles 
And, in a yawn, swallow the world;

He is Ennui! — His eye watery as though with tears, 
He dreams of scaffolds as he smokes his hookah pipe.
You know him reader, that refined monster,
— Hypocritish reader, — my fellow, — my brother!


The Sick Muse

My poor Muse, alas! what ails you today?
Your hollow eyes are full of nocturnal visions;
I see in turn reflected on your face
Horror and madness, cold and taciturn.

Have the green succubus, the rosy elf,
Poured out for you love and fear from their urns?
Has the hand of Nightmare, cruel and despotic,
Plunged you to the bottom of some weird Minturnae?

I would that your bosom, fragrant with health,
Were constantly the dwelling place of noble thoughts,
And that your Christian blood would flow in rhythmic waves

Like the measured sounds of ancient verse,
Over which reign in turn the father of all songs,
Phoebus, and the great Pan, lord of harvest.


The Bad Monk

Cloisters in former times portrayed on their high walls
The truths of Holy Writ with fitting pictures
Which gladdened pious hearts and lessened the coldness,
The austere appearance, of those monasteries.

In those days the sowing of Christ's Gospel flourished,
And more than one famed monk, seldom quoted today,
Taking his inspiration from the graveyard,
Glorified Death with naive simplicity.

— My soul is a tomb where, bad cenobite,
I wander and dwell eternally;
Nothing adorns the walls of that loathsome cloister.

O lazy monk! When shall I learn to make
Of the living spectacle of my bleak misery
The labor of my hands and the love of my eyes?


The Cat

Come, superb cat, to my amorous heart;
Hold back the talons of your paws,
Let me gaze into your beautiful eyes
Of metal and agate.

When my fingers leisurely caress you,
Your head and your elastic back,
And when my hand tingles with the pleasure
Of feeling your electric body,

In spirit I see my woman. Her gaze
Like your own, amiable beast,
Profound and cold, cuts and cleaves like a dart,

And, from her head down to her feet,
A subtle air, a dangerous perfume
Floats about her dusky body.


The Enemy

My youth has been nothing but a tenebrous storm, 
Pierced now and then by rays of brilliant sunshine; 
Thunder and rain have wrought so much havoc 
That very few ripe fruits remain in my garden.

I have already reached the autumn of the mind, 
And I must set to work with the spade and the rake 
To gather back the inundated soil 
In which the rain digs holes as big as graves.

And who knows whether the new flowers I dream of 
Will find in this earth washed bare like the strand, 
The mystic aliment that would give them vigor?

Alas! Alas! Time eats away our lives, 
And the hidden Enemy who gnaws at our hearts 
Grows by drawing strength from the blood we lose!


Evil Fate

To lift a weight so heavy, 
Would take your courage, Sisyphus!
Although one's heart is in the work, 
Art is long and Time is short.

Far from famous sepulchers 
Toward a lonely cemetery 
My heart, like muffled drums, 
Goes beating funeral marches.

Many a jewel lies buried 
In darkness and oblivion, 
Far, far away from picks and drills;

Many a flower regretfully 
Exhales perfume soft as secrets 
In a profound solitude.


My Former Life

For a long time I dwelt under vast porticos 
Which the ocean suns lit with a thousand colors, 
The pillars of which, tall, straight, and majestic, 
Made them, in the evening, like basaltic grottos.

The billows which cradled the image of the sky 
Mingled, in a solemn, mystical way, 
The omnipotent chords of their rich harmonies 
With the sunsets' colors reflected in my eyes;

It was there that I lived in voluptuous calm,
In splendor, between the azure and the sea,
And I was attended by slaves, naked, perfumed,

Who fanned my brow with fronds of palms 
And whose sole task it was to fathom 
The dolorous secret that made me pine away.


Gypsies Traveling

The prophetical tribe, that ardent eyed people, 
Set out last night, carrying their children 
On their backs, or yielding to those fierce appetites 
The ever ready treasure of pendulous breasts.

The men travel on foot with their gleaming weapons 
Alongside the wagons where their kin are huddled, 
Surveying the heavens with eyes rendered heavy 
By a mournful regret for vanished illusions.

The cricket from the depths of his sandy retreat 
Watches them as they pass, and louder grows his song; 
Cybele, who loves them, increases her verdure,

Makes the desert blossom, water spurt from the rock 
Before these travelers for whom is opened wide 
The familiar domain of the future's darkness.


Man and the Sea

Free man, you will always cherish the sea! 
The sea is your mirror; you contemplate your soul 
In the infinite unrolling of its billows; 
Your mind is an abyss that is no less bitter.

You like to plunge into the bosom of your image; 
You embrace it with eyes and arms, and your heart 
Is distracted at times from its own clamoring 
By the sound of this plaint, wild and untamable.

Both of you are gloomy and reticent:
Man, no one has sounded the depths of your being;
O Sea, no person knows your most hidden riches,
So zealously do you keep your secrets!

Yet for countless ages you have fought each other
Without pity, without remorse,
So fiercely do you love carnage and death,
O eternal fighters, implacable brothers!


Don Juan in Hades

When Don Juan descended to the underground sea, 
And when he had given his obolus to Charon, 
That gloomy mendicant, with Antisthenes' proud look, 
Seized the two oars with strong, revengeful hands.

Showing their pendent breasts and their unfastened gowns 
Women writhed and twisted under the black heavens, 
And like a great flock of sacrificial victims, 
A continuous groan trailed along in the wake.

Sganarelle with a laugh was demanding his wage, 
While Don Luis with a trembling finger 
Was showing to the dead, wandering along the shores, 
The impudent son who had mocked his white brow.

Shuddering in her grief, Elvira, chaste and thin, 
Near her treacherous spouse who was once her lover, 
Seemed to implore of him a final, parting smile 
That would shine with the sweetness of his first promises.

Erect in his armor, a tall man carved from stone 
Was standing at the helm and cutting the black flood; 
But the hero unmoved, leaning on his rapier, 
Kept gazing at the wake and deigned not look aside.


Punishment for Pride
In that marvelous time in which Theology
Flourished with the greatest energy and vigor,
It is said that one day a most learned doctor
— After winning by force the indifferent hearts,
Having stirred them in the dark depths of their being;
After crossing on the way to celestial glory,
Singular and strange roads, even to him unknown,
Which only pure Spirits, perhaps, had reached, — 
Panic-stricken, like one who has clambered too high,
He cried, carried away by a satanic pride:
"Jesus, little jesus! I raised you very high!
But had I wished to attack you through the defect
In your armor, your shame would equal your glory,
And you would be no more than a despised fetus!"

At that very moment his reason departed. 
A crape of mourning veiled the brilliance of that sun; 
Complete chaos rolled in and filled that intellect, 
A temple once alive, ordered and opulent, 
Within whose walls so much pomp had glittered. 
Silence and darkness took possession of it 
Like a cellar to which the key is lost.

Henceforth he was like the beasts in the street, 
And when he went along, seeing nothing, across 
The fields, distinguishing nor summer nor winter, 
Dirty, useless, ugly, like a discarded thing, 
He was the laughing-stock, the joke, of the children.


Beauty
I am fair, O mortals! like a dream carved in stone, 
And my breast where each one in turn has bruised himself 
Is made to inspire in the poet a love 
As eternal and silent as matter.

On a throne in the sky, a mysterious sphinx, 
I join a heart of snow to the whiteness of swans; 
I hate movement for it displaces lines, 
And never do I weep and never do I laugh.

Poets, before my grandiose poses, 
Which I seem to assume from the proudest statues, 
Will consume their lives in austere study;

For I have, to enchant those submissive lovers,
Pure mirrors that make all things more beautiful:
My eyes, my large, wide eyes of eternal brightness!


The Ideal

It will never be the beauties that vignettes show, 
Those damaged products of a good-for-nothing age, 
Their feet shod with high shoes, hands holding castanets, 
Who can ever satisfy any heart like mine.

I leave to Gavarni, poet of chlorosis, 
His prattling troop of consumptive beauties, 
For I cannot find among those pale roses 
A flower that is like my red ideal.

The real need of my heart, profound as an abyss, 
Is you, Lady Macbeth, soul so potent in crime, 
The dream of Aeschylus, born in the land of storms;

Or you, great Night, daughter of Michelangelo, 
Who calmly contort, reclining in a strange pose 
Your charms molded by the mouths of Titans!


The Giantess

At the time when Nature with a lusty spirit 
Was conceiving monstrous children each day, 
I should have liked to live near a young giantess, 
Like a voluptuous cat at the feet of a queen.

I should have liked to see her soul and body thrive 
And grow without restraint in her terrible games; 
To divine by the mist swimming within her eyes 
If her heart harbored a smoldering flame;

To explore leisurely her magnificent form;
To crawl upon the slopes of her enormous knees,
And sometimes in summer, when the unhealthy sun

Makes her stretch out, weary, across the countryside, 
To sleep nonchalantly in the shade of her breasts, 
Like a peaceful hamlet below a mountainside.


The Jewels

My darling was naked, and knowing my heart well, 
She was wearing only her sonorous jewels, 
Whose opulent display made her look triumphant 
Like Moorish concubines on their fortunate days.

When it dances and flings its lively, mocking sound, 
This radiant world of metal and of gems 
Transports me with delight; I passionately love 
All things in which sound is mingled with light.

She had lain down; and let herself be loved 
From the top of the couch she smiled contentedly 
Upon my love, deep and gentle as the sea, 
Which rose toward her as toward a cliff.

Her eyes fixed upon me, like a tamed tigress, 
With a vague, dreamy air she was trying poses, 
And by blending candor with lechery, 
Her metamorphoses took on a novel charm;

And her arm and her leg, and her thigh and her loins,
Shiny as oil, sinuous as a swan,
Passed in front of my eyes, clear-sighted and serene;
And her belly, her breasts, grapes of my vine,

Advanced, more cajoling than angels of evil, 
To trouble the quiet that had possessed my soul, 
To dislodge her from the crag of crystal, 
Where calm and alone she had taken her seat.

I thought I saw blended in a novel design
Antiope's haunches and the breast of a boy,
Her waist set off so well the fullness of her hips.
On that tawny brown skin the rouge stood out superb!

— And when at last the lamp allowed itself to die,
Since the fire alone lighted the room,
Each time that it uttered a flaming sigh,
It drenched with blood that amber colored skin!


Exotic Perfume

When, with both my eyes closed, on a hot autumn night, 
I inhale the fragrance of your warm breast 
I see happy shores spread out before me, 
On which shines a dazzling and monotonous sun;

A lazy isle to which nature has given 
Singular trees, savory fruits, 
Men with bodies vigorous and slender, 
And women in whose eyes shines a startling candor.

Guided by your fragrance to these charming countries,
I see a port filled with sails and rigging
Still utterly wearied by the waves of the sea,

While the perfume of the green tamarinds, 
That permeates the air, and elates my nostrils, 
Is mingled in my soul with the sailors' chanteys.


English translation: William Aggeler, The Flowers of Evil (Fresno, CA: Academy Library Guild, 1954)
From: https://fleursdumal.org/
